---
tags:
  - expect-film
time: 2024-02-25
---

## Abstract

"Expect'' is a speculative sci-fi documentary shot in Virtual Reality (VR) that explores the hidden details behind how disabilities are represented in science fiction literature and media. The work features Chinese actors with disabilities role-playing as sci-fi characters in VR to rewrite, challenge and reimagine the conventional, ableist sci-fi tropes, such as “super-crip” and the tendency to “fix” or eradicate disabilities through the myth of enhancement. It brings focus to a larger social fabric of bio-power, labor, technology, and their interplay in the Chinese ideological environment. The accessibility of spectatorship is self-reflexively manifested inside and outside the film. “Expect” includes the process of actors with different disabilities interacting with the inaccessible VR device, and the film juxtaposes dialogues, meta-narrations and actors’ real-story interviews to further break the fourth walls. The VR filmmaking process reveals the fake promise of immersiveness, media augmentation and accessibility, which becomes the best commentary on how disabilities were instrumentalized yet never really been respected in a futuristic discussion.

## Background

### Disability in Real Life


The definition of disability has always been changing along with the evolution of social value and contexts. The three most classic ways to understand disabilities are moral models, medical models and social models.

#### Different Individual Models

 Although usually we would talk about moral models and medical models as individual models, in our discussion I would like to see them under the same category. Both of them view disability based on personal physiological traits, and these notion also lead to the tropes in science fiction that we will talk about later. 
##### Moral Model

The moral model of disability views disability as a reflection of an individual's or family's character, deeds, thoughts, and karma, leading to either stigma and shame or being seen as a mark of honor and strength. In ancient China, for example, although there was notion to support and care about people with disabilities in classical Chinese philosophy, in rural area disability is often seen as a punishment or a test of faith which requires moral correction or spiritual healing rather than medical treatment or social accommodation, especially under the influence of Buddism and its idea of Karma[[Disabilities in Scifi#^d47931|(Ghose, 2007).]]  This model is often utilized in media in which characters with disabilities either are evil due to their miserable life caused by their body and marginalized situation, or become what we call “super-crip”, who becomes the inspirational symbol simply because they overcome the barriers that were imposed by the normative environment; the Chinese phrase word "身残志坚"(strong spirit despite weak body) represent this common media representation of Disability. The individual is expected to overcome all the barriers on their own or their family instead of complaining about the environment. (Yang, 2015, summarizing Oliver, 1983, 1990；Finkelstein, 1993)  

##### Medical Model

In 1980, disabilities are categorized under disease by WHO in _International Classification of Functions, Disabilities and Health_, paving the foundation for medical model. The medical model of disability emerged as societies started to view disability more as a matter of health and biology rather than moral failing. It focuses on the individual's impairment or difference, treating disability as a problem that resides within the person. According to the medical model, the primary response to disability is treatment or cure through medical intervention. This model seeks to "fix" the disability through surgery, medication, or rehabilitation, with the goal of bringing the individual's physical or mental condition as close to the norm as possible. (Yang, 2015 ) While the medical model has contributed significantly to advancements in treatment and accessibility, it has also been criticized for overlooking the social and environmental barriers faced by people with disabilities.

Medical model is still widely used among different countries. While it is a little more benevolent than individual model, it still didn't escape the mindset of regarding disability as casued by someone's own physical traits. Mike Oliver in *The Individual And Social Models of Disability* explained the distinction between illness and disabilities, and the key problem in medical model: 

>Some illnesses may have disabling consequences and many disabled people have illnesses at various points in their lives......doctors can have a role to play in the lives of disabled people......The problem arises when doctors try to use their knowledge and skills to treat disability rather than illness......[and]The whole medical and rehabilitation enterprise is founded upon an ideology of normality. It's aim is to restore the disabled person to normality, whatever that may mean.......whatever its costs in terms of the pain and suffering of disabled individuals, is always justified and justifiable -the ideology of normality rules. 

#### Social Model

While medical models was established, a lot of social movement also were happening during the same time. Organizations like International Disability Alliance and the Union of the Physically Impaired Against Segregation resisted the institutionalization and isolation of people with disabilities, and insisted the society to take up responsibility to eradicate barriers. In 2001, _International Classification of Functions，Disabilities and Health_ was published by WHO, (Yang, 2015) which formally recognized health not only on a personal level, but also on a social level. barriers are not only caused by impairment of a body, but also caused by different relative environment. A marked ground could be barrier for wheelchair user, but might be convenient for visually impaired person to figure out the road. (WHO, 2001) If the facilities in a society is good enough, and if opportunities for people with disability to participate social life is adequate enough, the barrier will ceased to exist. Only when a wheelchair user is refused by the school because there is too much stairs, when a deaf worker is refused by a company because of lack of support and patience, would disability arises as into a cage and label that press on an individual. 

### Disability in Science Fiction

>All fiction is a product of a specific time, place, and culture that influence the way the stories are constructed and what discourses they are part of. Popular culture not only says something about the creators of fiction and their subjective world view, but its popularity also testifies to wider discourses in society today.
>(Josefine Wälivaara, 2018, p. 231) 

Fictions are mirror of our public consciousness. While I don't think the settings and characters of an individual novel necessary reflect the author's moral values, I do think that popular trends and common tropes in works reveal the common subconscious choices that originated from our shared belief, and the story in return shape, reinforce or subvert the reader's norms. The starting point of this project is from the observation of popular science fiction from in which the mindsets in reality are represented. I would briefly talk about what kind of science fiction works I am referring to in this project, how they are related to the different models we have discussed, and how it leads to the artistic research in the next chapter. 

#### Science Fiction and Futurescapes

From *Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea* to *Matrix* (the Wachowskis, 1999), sci-fi works dedicate themselves to think about how should human understand themselves and one another by the imagining alternative living conditions, some of them are almost equivalent to philosophical thought experiments. Sci-fi is definitely not limited to presenting what is mentioned above. A big part of the sci-fi works are disaster films like *2012* (Roland Emmerich, 2009) and *Wandering Earth*(Guo Fan, 2019) which showcase how future situation leads to big human crisis, political fantasy that involves modern technology like *1984* (George Orwell, 1984), more intimate approach like *The Story Of Your Life* (Ted Chiang, 1998) that explore more niche aspect of human technology interaction or Niche *Journey to the west*. 

The definition of Sci-fi in this paper will focus more on the sci-fi works that reveal the picture of a society or a portrait of a person living in a society under the development of technology or ideology, in another word, Futurescapes. Works like *Brave New World*, *Star Wars*, *Neuromancer* and  *Pantheon* would fall into that category. These type of works are also the one of the most popular types of science fiction works, which means they not only reflect a normally accepted belief or concern about technology, but also that inappropriate portrayal of people in minority groups-- people of color, people with disabilities and LGBTQ+ communities--in such works will put these group in danger of being reduced to symbols and instruments of narratives and further inflicted into stereotype. 

#### Tropes of Characters with disability in Science Fiction

Disability appears very common in Literature, though usually as a device instead of main theme. In *Narrative prosthesis: disability and the dependencies of discourse*, David T. Mitchell and Sharon L. Snyder explained:

>The perception of a “crisis” or a “special situation” has made disabled people the subject of not only governmental policies and social programs but also a primary object of literary representation......their function in literary discourse is primarily twofold: disability pervades literary narrative, first, as a stock feature of characterization and, second, as an opportunistic metaphorical device......while stories rely upon the potency of disability as a symbolic figure, they rarely take up disability as an experience of social or political dimensions. (Mitchell and Snyder, 2001, p. 47)

This passage concludes the common situation of disability in a story. For protagonist, a story might very likely starts with a character having disability, and either their whole motivation to proceed the adventure is to being fixed, or they are fixed right at the beginning. For villain, disability is the symbol of miserable life and the primary trauma that puts them into the dark path. For side character, disability is used to prove their perseverance, sacredness and innocence, or to set off another character's innocence. All these tropes reveal how the narrative treats disability under individual models: If you are a good character, you need to be fixed because disability is disease, or at least you should hold high morality to support a "despite that they are cripped..." narrative, and if you can't be a good character, under a moral model, you are bad exactly because you are disabled, because you are monster.

I will use *Full-metal Alchemist* as an example, because I personally love *Full-Metal Alchemist* so much that when I read the about the Narrative Prothesis, the first work I thought of is this piece. It's not really a sci-fi as the background is a little steampunk and fantasy, but the way alchemy is used in the story is very much similar to that of technology. Protagonist Edward Erlic lost his arm and legs after a human revival alchemy ritual, and while he got equipped with Automails afterwards, which are Metal Prothesis that enabled him to be as agile as any other fighters, he still persist on finding his lost body and took on the journey. When he hadn't got Automails, he was depressed and couldn't set off for anything. As soon as he recollected his hope, he requested for Automails. This dichotomy of "cured and hopeful" vs "not cured and miserable" happens several times in the story. 

The stereotype of the mutilated avengers (Mitchell and Snyder, 2001, p. 97) also exist in the story: The character Scar, who was one of the villains in the first half part of the stories (although more like frenemy), also experienced injury which took away his right arm. Although his arm was replaced by the one of his brother's, his cruelty in killing and destroying still originates from that trauma. 

#### Transhumanism and Technological Cure

There are many directions to critique about the represnetaions of disabilities, and what I am particularly interested is the idea of "technological cure": for Edward Erlic it's Automails and philosopher's stone, for Luke Skywalker in *Star Wars* it's the cybernetic limb, and for Motoko Kusanagi in Ghost in the Shell it's her whole body. Although this is the almost most classic way to imagine human future, we rarely think of these characters as disabled, because as soon as their disabilities emerges, it is erased by the technology and the body is fixed back to the normal, sometimes even powerful than human. The disability is only used as the pathway to level up, a transient status, a "used to be", instead of an actual state that's worth being discussed. Such tropes reflect a medical model of thinking. prothesis are presented as the panacea to turn a deformed body back to a homogenous standard, while the danger and risk that accompanies the technology are often ignored and overlooked in the stories. That's why in *Cyberpunk 2077*, changing limbs and arms are as easy as changing clothes, but nobody cares about whether they need to be charged.

Such a technological cure is closely related to a philosophical and social movement called transhumanism. According to Nick Bostrom, one of the authors of *The Transhumanist Declaration* 

>Transhumanism ...... holds that current human nature is improvable through the use of applied science and other rational methods, which may make it possible to increase human health-span, extend our intellectual and physical capacities, and give us increased control over our own mental states and moods. Technologies of concern include not only current ones, like genetic engineering and information technology, but also anticipated future developments such as fully immersive virtual reality, machinephase nanotechnology, and artificial intelligence

It's worth noting that transhumanism is not equivalent with posthumanism which strive to move away from an anthropocentric view by embracing the implication of technology. Transhumanism and posthuman are actually quite different. Posthumanism embraces different creatures and races, diversity, and de-centered narratives. When Donna Haraway talked about cyborgs and posthuman, she was calling for a more diverse society where people can all be living in different ways. Yet in a transhumanist future, there is a highly centralized and homogenous view of a "better future", a standardized trajectory of "evolution": stronger, smarter, and live longer. A good transhumanist future is not one in which all the different people can have their own way, but one in which all people move efficiently on a similar channels. The presence of disability is a sign of failed future, and with transhumanism, disabilities are cured, erased, and therefore not part of the future (Wälivaara, 2018, p. 230) That's why transhumanist trope in science fiction is problematic: **People who don't exist in the imagination of future won't have their place in the actual future either**. 

That's also why I feel so worried about the social climate in China which is quite conforming to transhumanism. Eugenics and gene planning is one of the most important technology that trashumanists advocate for, and such idea is already exemplified in the Chinese "Family Planning" policy. Consisting of "One Child Policy"（一孩政策） and "Late Marriage Late Birth, Low Birthrate Better Birth." （晚婚晚育，少生优生）
中国语境很符合超人类主义
优生优育
In China, according Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Persons with Disabilities, “a person with a disability is a person who, psychologically, physiologically…has suffered a loss or abnormality… and has lost … the ability to engage in certain activities in a normal manner.” The definition is focused more on a person’s instability to fit the “normal” life (usually production life) in with the “normal” manner, without a clear definition of what normal means. 

#### An Alternative Future of Social Model and Anti-Cure

> [!info]
> needs revision

The concept of "anti-cure" refers to a critical stance or perspective against the idea of curing disabilities. This viewpoint is rooted in the social model of disability, which suggests that disability is not personal deficits, but the failure of a society accommodate and include those with natural or biological impairments (Courtney, 2019) An example of such notion could be the case of a deaf couple intentionally chose to have a deaf baby (Spriggs, M. 2002). When I first read about that you could choose not to be "fixed", I was shocked because I know this would be such a controversial if it is mentioned in China. In a society where people are compared with a normalized better standard all the time, it's hard to be happy with what one has and even take that as part of their unique identity. 

What would a futurescape of that allows for anti-cure be? Maybe it will enhance accessibility through comprehensive societal reform through widespread adoption of universal design principles--adding enough slope and elevators, signal sound for traffic lights, sign language translator for performances. Apps and website have to conform to the screen reader standard. People are not forced to take mental illness pills, and parents are not forced to get rid of their baby through eugenics. Would these be hard to achieve? It actually doesn't take super advanced technology to achieve all these. Then why are we not achieving it? Why do we have to expect people equip themselves with prothesis, when it could be simply solved by adding a slope? It seems like the improvement of technology is probably harder than the change of social notions. 

### The Question of Omniscient Perspective

Although I read these theories of disability studies and understood the claims of anti-cure, a strange feeling always floated in my mind -- Is it really so easy to achieve the accessible world? What's really stopping us? As an non-disabled artist, I can't imagine how it really is to be a person with disabilities, but if I did have temporary paralyzing experience of breaking my back and couldn't get up from the bed, during which I don't know how soon or whether I could recover. The thought that flashed through my mind at that time was that I would really like some technology that would allow me to get off the ground and run again. 

Even though from an Omniscient perspective, I knew what the more "progressive" and "righteous" perspective should be, when it comes down to it, it's hard for to resist the temptation to be cured by technology. One time I listened to a panel about birth control and disability, while most of the expert there were talking about the anti-eugenics, which I totally agree. Later a guest of an ordinary woman with disabilities told her story expressed her gratitude towards her child being healthy and normal. I can feel the scene was a little awkward at that moment: on one hand from the perspective of advocating for disabilities right, we need to oppose the idea of eugenics, but on the other hand, it's such a natural thought to want your child to be healthy, especially when family have to afford all the expenses to override social barriers. No one could blame that mother. After all, who has the right to force her to undertake all the burden of ideological progress? The life of a human being is too short to expect the social change, and not everyone is ready to fight against it, especially when one understand the stubbornness of the norm. It's easy to imagine for an era from an omniscient perspective, but hard to carry it out as a person. If it's so hard for an individual to even imagine abandoning the persistence to be abled, then how could we blame science fiction for not being able to imagine an alternative possibility? What's at core stopping people from really believing the vision of a non-ablism world?

The question of the omniscient perspective also happens on the research level. If the current depiction of characters with disabilities and futurescape is not being responsible enough, then what would be a good way to create those movies and novels? I again couldn't help imagining myself being the author -- can't write a disabled villain because that's stereotype, can't write a disabled good person because that's super-crip, can't write a normal disabled person because that's ignoring the issue of disabilities; and, after all, how big a responsibility does a writer have to write appropriately, while it's just one novel? The micro versus macro conflict in fiction is just as confusing as the one in reality. I am not sure. I need to find out. 

## Embodied Exploration: *Expect* 

In *Lost Race of Science Fiction*(1980), Octavia Butler writes:

>what do authors ordinarily do when they decide to write about an unfamiliar subject? They research. They read—in this case recent biographies and autobiographies of people in the group they want to write about are good. They talk to members of that group—friends, acquaintances, coworkers, fellow students, even strangers on buses or waiting in lines. 

They research, read and talk, and afterwards, they need to write. As a filmmaker, how do I achieve all of those things together? 

### Form: Half Documentary Half Fiction

The first way I think of is to make a documentary. The question I was having all comes thinking from the perspective of people with disability and ask how they feel and how would they choose. *Fixed: The Science/Fiction of Human Enhancement* is a great example that covers all the basic conflict point around the debate of transhumanism, in which opinions from scholars, ordinary people, engineers and many other stakeholders form a spectrum of discussion over this topic. 

What I am interested, however, is not only the discussion of reality. What I am interested is the real tendency that's being reflected in the context of science fiction. "纸上得来终觉浅，绝知此事要躬行"（Paper knowledge is shallow, real understanding comes from personal experience.) Instead of analyzing based on existing science fiction work, why not throw ourselves into those world? It's probably when one really becomes an individual in those future-scape that they would find out what's really at stake to live in this world. 

I decided on the having the film be presented as half fiction half documentary: sometimes we chat about real life, and sometimes we made up things, and in the film, the two are not strictly distinguished, so that the audience can't tell the truth from the false. Shooting a pure documentary would require me to observe even spy on their every expression, movement and talking. I would want to get as much footage as possible in order to present their kernel of personality, rather than a performance for the camera. A half fictional and half documentary film admits the non-realism in the first place. It refuses to present everything as it is and nullifies the expectation of realism or truth-seeking in conventional documentary context. The world, houses and even their own appearance are all virtual assets that are by no means realistic, but since they are designed and selected based on their imagination, they do reflect their personal preferences and values, just like how we see real life from science fictions. 

It's worth mentioning that I also decided to keep the realm of the project within China. As a Chinese artist, I am particularly interested in disability in the Chinese context. In China, disability study is not yet an official discipline, nor is there enough discussion on equal rights for disability which are sometimes even politically sensitive. At the same time, there's a strange tendency toward transhumanism in the values of Chinese society today as I have mentioned before. While the question in Chinese context is fascinating, I am also more familiar with the disabilities community in China, as I had worked with different communities of disabilities and learned disability studies through Chinese grassroots organizations; in my professional practice, I have a long-time working relationship with Chinese disabled artists(who will also participate in this project) and have a follower community of disabilities. I wanted to have deeper conversations with them on how they see ableism permeating in China, and if there is a way out.

### Strategy: Story As Both Noun and Verb

In order to achieve the half fiction half documentary effect, and in order to satisfy the need of working with people overseas, I decided to use role-playing in VR in the research production. 

#### Role Playing and Mime Acting: Invisible Narrative

A Role-Playing Game(RPG), is a genre of game in which players assume the roles of characters in a fictional setting. When I was playing some TRPG game(Tabletop Role-Playing Game, in Chinese we call it "跑团", which means "run the group"), I feel like I was writing a novel along with other player. While still very much being myself, I am indeed acting another character, and will not think out of character (OOC). I see the potential of using this framework to both talk about problems in real life and explore science fiction imagination. 

I asked people with disabilities who are interested in science fiction to imagine themselves as a member of a science fiction work or a future, alien, alternative civilization. I act as a traveller who accidentally came into their, and they would take me around their world and answer various questions of mine. 

I first asked some of my friends who fit the criteria, and then sent out an open call to the WeChat group of disabilities communities, and soon I got several responses, from which I did the interview, and selected 3 people plus 3 of my friends in the end, all of whom are from China. The way I filter them is based quite subjective: simply based on whether I feel they are interesting and in the play while doing Role-Playing with me. 

The reason why I have this "interview" process is because I am not simply looking for documentary subject --  I am recruiting actors. I regard the participants of this project as what I call "interview-actor". While most of what we discussed was based on their story, which stemmed from their own lives, they retain the right to fictionalize the truth; On the other hand, I do have requirement on them as actors, as they need to dedicate enough shooting time with me, be able to jump into the story whenever we start, and stay within the character during the acting. Another reason why I want to recruit them as actors is because I’ve seen a lot of other projects that claim themselves to be “co-creation”, but ended up as just exploiting the time and labor of people with disabilities for free. In this project, actors are also paid for their acting, time and effort. They contribute to the script, set design and their costume design. 

#### Virtual Reality: The Cost and Benefits in Remote Production

When I am talking about sets and costumes, however, I am actually referring to 3D worlds and avatars. This is because our Role-Playing didn't happen in real life, but in Virtual Reality(VR). We use VRChat as the platform for immersive environment, act in it and record the acting through screen recording. To some degrees, VR itself also a very "sci-fi-ish" technology. It is constantly being depicted as the ultimate technology for entertainment, education, and even escaping the limitations of the physical world. I have to admit that filmming in VR does save a lot of money for me. The cost of travel, lodging, camera, SD cards, mics, set building, costume making, make up, location scouting, mental and physical energy is way higher than VR filmmaking. 

In VR environment, Actors in China can be in a same space with me and my cinematographer in the US. Art direction wise, I have endless lighting, endless props, endless ways to design the look of a character with all kinds of special effect. Camera in VR can be fixed, hand-held,  drone or fixed on a track, and it can even go through walls and even see through things if I allow them to. Cameraman can do complicated movement and blocking that they couldn't achieve in reality, and they don't need to carry the heavy equipment (It's truly a labor to carry big cameras that can do these things). 

On the other hand, however, VR brings its own problems. The technical limitations, high costs, and a lack of widespread content makes VR a perpetually unfulfilled promise, an illusion shattering process we also experienced in the shooting process. The Technical difficulty also limit the things we can do: we can’t do complicated face tracking nor full body tracking, and the models couldn’t be too complicated or the game would crash. We get tired from looking at the extreme close screen and have to take off the headset after 2 hours. The constant bugs of device arise out of nowhere, and the Internet firewalls between China and US keeps breaking our connections, not to mention the Meta which design the worst user experience in their system……All those process becomes the best real life parallel of how technology, while providing some convenience, creates even more troubles.

The failure of technology is also reflected in the lack of consideration for disabilities. Actors with immobile hands find it difficult to put the headset on properly, and visually impaired users are not provided with screen readers. In VRChat there is no existing instruction on how to create a wheelchair chair character, and I have somehow trick the system to believe that the wheelchair character still have two standing legs in order for it to function. While we imagine the technological cure to be the problem solver for all the accessibility issue, these situation proves that most of the high tech product wouldn't put the need of accessibility as priority, which often comes as a by-product. Only when there is a high risk technology, like brain-computer interface, would people push people with disabilities to the foreground.The process and tutorial for how to create an accessible VR environment are included in the film, pointing back to the concept the mixing of fiction and reality.

Although the VR world theoretically can contain endless objects, due to the improvisation nature, not every needed props could be prepared. To resolve this,  we used a technique called “invisible object”, which is essentially miming. We mimic the gesture of touching an object, and by doing so we feel the object even without the actual physical object. This method enable us to “create” objects when there were limited assets and interaction in the game, and by echoing and responding to each other’s performance. I have used this methods in my previous work *Palace* and *Empty Touch Workshop*, and while in previous cases we were touching things with out eyes closed, this time I added a step to open our eyes and mimic sound effects while doing the gesturing. The methods not only help the actors enter their acting state more quickly, but also thematically fits the setting that every world and stories in this film are made up out of thin air. This materialless performance bridges the performers who are in different places; it is both an exercise in acting and the building of a tacit understanding. We work in tandem to accomplish a non-verbal communication, like children playing house, stepping into the fantasy of mutual recognition.

While being shot in VR, the final product is a single channel film piece that shows the best in a theatre, conforming to a more traditional medium as what is being discussed here is also traditional popular medium. Yet the shooting method itself provide the viewer a way to enter the virtual space. The pop up window of the game menu, the presence of the VR camera, the shaky point of view all convey the sense of immersiveness, creating a new kind of viewing experience that feels both in and out of the game. 

> [!info] 
> Not really sure about how to write the viewing effect.

### The Worlds: Different Models

In this chapter I will introduce the specific worlds that we built in the film, as well as introducing different characters. For readability sake, I will just use the character name to refer to the actor. Here I am only briefly writing about the general world view and some interesting points, and will mix the true story with the fiction part, just like how the film is presented. 

#### Cyberpunk World

A lot of times we associate sci-fi with the cyberpunk style. Cyberpunk is a sub-genre of science fiction that portrays "high tech, low life", with usually gritty, neon-lit urban visual landscape. People living in cyberpunk world are able to enjoy advanced technology, while these technology doesn't erase but increase the gap between the rich and the poor. It typically features characters with cybernetic enhancements, hacking, virtual realities, and rebellion against oppressive societal control, examining the consequences of unchecked technological progress and corporate power. In a way a cyberpunk world is also a world that is lead by ablism and Darwinism. Interestingly, Most of the men I intereviewd come up with a cyberpunk worldview, and from interviewing them, I can also see how their personality intertwined in the world view they come up with. 

Xiao Hua worked in a technology company and imagined himself equipped with a bionic arm pumped by a electronic heart. He is a vagabond soldier whose mission is to liberate his home planet which is colonized by other civilizations, despite that the galaxy he lives in is a peaceful and resourceful area. Everything he described in the world he lives in is very idealized--the bionic arm is as cheap as a phone, electricity and resource is so resourceful in his living area, and making money is easy because they only need to order the robot to do things, and there is always jobs available. If really calculate that logically, there is almost no way that all of these elements can exist perfectly without any sacrifice. The fact that in his world there is still colonialism represent that the world order is still about conquering and excelling others, which is exemplified in his live value. 

Despite being a person with disability, Xiaohua's attitude reminds me of a lot of ablism's opinion. Even though he experienced inaccessible education environment, he still thinks that most of the responsibility belongs to him to overcome those difficulties. When I mentioned the accommodation policy in my school, he thinks that it’s not right to ask for accommodation because it is a kind of "cheating" and disrespect to the rule. He is also supporter for eugenics. When I ask him if he thinks he doesn't need to be born, his answer is yes. If he knew before he was born, he would choose to abort himself. 

On one hand, I really couldn’t agree with him, but on the other hand, I deeply understand why he thinks that way. Everything he said, represent the most classic Chinese perspective, in which embolism is deeply rooted in. Since we first went to school, we’ve been educated that we need to improve ourselves instead of questioning the environment, and it’s a virtue to obey the rule and respect the collective. Darwinism is one of the core spirit throughout Chinese education: one more point in the exam means out winning a hundred people, and only the person who score the higher would go to the better school to have a brighter future. China's family planning that I have mentioned before is also strongly emphasized in the politics class. All these notions are taken for granted throughout the trajectory of the growth of a Chinese person. 

There are several dilemma in his situation. The society already has its cruel survival rule, and even if we can change our own perception, it’s hard to change what other people think. In the end, one would be very likely ended up even more marginalized by not following the rules. Another dilemma is that, from his perspective, just by brining up the need of disability could reinforcing the difference and stereotypes, even if it's just a request for accommodation need; he wants to blend in the normal people's crowd, be powerful and perform as good as abled people so that he can be respected by the society via his ability, even if that means more huge compromise on his end. 

Another character in this world is June, who imagined himself as a mercenary in Night City, taking reference from the game Cyberpunk 2077. He is a visually impaired person, and I knew him from volunteering in the co-running association for visually impaired runner, as he is the host for that organization. He have actually played that game, and the way he described himself was so natural that A viewer couldn’t really tell whether he is telling the truth or making things up. In the full interview with him, we talked about a lot of interesting details in that world, for example, To get modification, he would need to go to the doctor and go through a lengthy surgery every time, while in the game, the player would only experience the game VCR for the first time, and the rest of the cases changing your eyes or arms will be just as easy as changing your clothes. Xiaohua clearly has an idealized picture for the cyberpunk world, but June, while enjoying the technological enhancement, clearly are aware of the problems underneath the benefit. 

#### Near Future World

At the end of the cyberpunk, Xiaohua gave Xia Xia a sci-if book, and told her that this book is so fantastical even to an already sic-fi world. When Xia Xia enters this book, he encounters Mr. Kong Kong and Miss. Shi Ju. Their world surprisingly wasn't using as advanced technology as other places are. It is definitely a slow town. People here are not eager for efficiency. They are more interested in history, art, literature and just taking time. Miss.Time Orange herself wrote novels, mostly fan-fictions. She likes adding wheelchair perspectives into her novel. 

The main thread in this chapter lies on the conversation between Xia Xia and Miss.Time Orange Mr. Kong Kong is an activist in disability rights, similar to his role in reality. I met him in a reading seminar he hosted, and it is in that seminar that I encountered the ides of disability being “the Narrative Prothesis”. He is against the idea of fixing disability, and although I agree with him, I threw him a lot of challenges on his points, especially in terms of how this could be possible at a personal level. Although advocating disabilities right seem to be about the advocating are around policy and facility which seems to be far from individual, from talking to him. 

Just like in Chinese medicine fixing the symptom is not really curing the disease, the root cause of ablism is not only about the amount of resources of a country, but lies deep in the culture of taking other people's value judgement as the value of our life. We believe that success meanings owning more resources than others, and we believe that other people believe it too. When we think other people's such criteria decides our value of ourselves, we start to follow and contribute to ablism. That's why in Mr. Kong Kong's world, the rich and the poor are not so divided, and the successology in that society is about whether oneself could live their life without regrets, which is highly subject and personal itself. 

During a conversation, I inserted several clips of the interaction between Mrs. Orange and me. Miss.Time Orange is a wheelchair user, and her own room is designed to be fully accessible. The process of designing the house and getting feedback from her was an interesting correspondence of what Mr. Kong Kong mentioned that when building an architecture, people with disability should get involved into the creation process. 

The most interesting characteristic of Miss.Time Orange is that she is a fan-fiction writer. She talked about how she bring wheelchair as a fetish in her own work, and talked about how her disability determined her role in her relationship with her girlfriend. Further on, she talked about how she is dissatisfied with the depiction of wheelchair character in fiction, . 

Miss.Time Orange also mentioned that back in the day when she was a student, she was having difficulties of going to classes because classroom were all very high, and she has to have her father and mother carry her upstairs. In the second semester, she informed that she couldn't do teaching internship because the schools are not equipped with elevators. If she can't complete her internship, she won't be able to fulfill the graduation criteria for teacher trainees and won't be able to work as a teacher. All these incidents are based on real life events, and it is clear that to change people's awareness might be even more difficult than changing the technology in the world.

#### Unity World

Unity is a very complex world, because the author of this world--Lulu, has made a very complete world view herself. When she first approach me she said she likes Robert J. Sawyer and Xi He, and I knew she is a hard-core sci-fi fan. Her natural voice is a little stuttered and slow, but that also gave her voice a weird sense of tension, which works really well in storytelling. Her burst of energy and fast improvisational skills makes her story stands out quite differently among all the worlds. 

The Unity is a civilization where people's mind are all connected. They live in highly modernized world, high rise building with the most advanced technology. Unity people, according to Lulu, can share knowledge with instantly like maga-computers, and even have the ability to calculate and experience higher dimensional information. 

As Unity share their consciousness, to some degrees they are not individuals. All of them are a single unity. Their pronoun is a single they, and it's the same for any of them. Each Unity body has a blue square on their forehead. When a person grows into adult, they could choose whether to join Unity or not. To be a unity means being part of an advanced society, living a higher quality life with more companions, but it also means erasing your own identity. Talking to one unity would be equivalent to talking to every unity. 

People who chose not to join Unity is called the Lonely People, or loners. Living in a small village with broken houses, they don't want to be assimilated. A loner doesn't have a job, because Unity is so productive that they take care of all the work in the society. The Lonely People can only undertake some "unimportant works" like basic crafts thing or doing art, (sadly true). Even for art, The Lonely People couldn't produce anything that Unity needs, because Unity can use AI to generate and consume art immediately. Money became meaningless to the Lonely People, because they accept monthly economic payment from Unity. In another word, The Lonely People are raised by Unity. 

Lulu is a loner without her two hands. Her job is mosquito net maker, for fun, as mosquito nets are mass produced by Unity mostly. She took me to her house, in which there is a big computer. She is computer scientist, (in real life she is also having a test for a computer science graduate school) and I was surprised that although she holds a really distain attitude towards Unity, she was actually one of the developer of Unity, but left the project because Unity derails her expectations. She want to use machine to overcome her disability, but doesn't want it to control her mind.  

When we were walking around the village, we a drama happening between another a mom and her child who joined Unity. The mom's name is Maria, and her sun Dog Egg (literal translation of “狗蛋", an inelegant name that people in the Chinese rural area gave to their children) joined Unity as soon as he turned 18. Maria is upset about that, however, because she thinks Dog Egg's personality is being erased by Unity. In one occasion, Maria caught the Unity who used to be Dog Egg, and forced him to turn back into a loner. They had a big argument. In the end, Maria gave in because she didn't want to erase her child's mind just like what Unity does. Dog Egg turned back to Unity, and Maria killed herself in despair. Being a childhood friend of Dog Egg, Lulu is outraged. We went to Unity and saw Dog Egg again, but obviously he is no longer himself, nor was he feeling sorry for his mother. To Lulu, Unity doesn't have humanity anymore. 

For a long time I had difficulty understanding what this Unity world means. There are so many wonderful metaphors that each could signifies a lot of things, yet what essentially is this world reflecting? If the cyberpunk world means modify yourself instead of the world, and the near future world means modify the world instead of yourself, then what does Unity world means? It has both sides as characters, but is it a repetitive presentation? When I ask Lulu to explain the character "Lulu", she seems to be setting her as a very ambivalent character; she doesn't like Unity, but also doesn't push Unity back as she is being taken care of Unity. From talking to her more, I realize that although she has this awareness of disabilities right, she still minds a lot about other people's view. Her movements, handwritings and voices are being disliked by others, and all these things hurt her feeling a lot. She knows the world isn't right, but she can't help wanting to be admitted, and can't help to be realistic about the situation. She can't fall completely into realism or idealism, and that's where her anxiety comes from. Therefore, Lulu's chapter is not only an extension of the previous two chapter, but also a further question: We know all the theory and possibilities, but it's so hard to be self-consistent with any of those. Being in the limbo is what most people struggle with.
### The Ambivalent Individual

#### How to write a character with disability

A lot of time when we talk about science fiction stories, we are talking about worldviews and settings, about very big concepts and ideas, but I prefer the understanding from Octavia Butler that, at the end of the day, science fiction writers are writing about people, especially people in minority who needs more exposure to the public. (Butler, 2016, p4) I also understand, however, that it's so easy to end up using people with disability as a novel story starter, a pedal of story, or a functional puppet. So what's the actual problem? As writer, how to appropriately represent people with disabilities? To our previous problem, should we write more about the issue of disabilities, or should we write less about it? 

After these chatting and acting with different actors, I seem to have some answers. When I was first interviewing them, I was just asking them very big questions about the world, about the story, and generally about the social environment they live in, without going any deeper into their life, but as I was got to do role-playing with them in VR, I started to have more tangible feeling about their characteristics. Lulu loves climbing around, Miss. Time Orange likes playing TRPG and games, Xiaohua is a little impetuous and doesn't like waiting......Through more in-depth conversation, I know more details of their life, and from those details the specificity of the life as a person with disabilities naturally arise. Some of those details contributes to their personalities, and some of them don't. 

So how to properly depict disabilities in works? Mr. Kong Kong mentioned it a little in our conversation. bit Another the key of a proper representation of character with disability lies exactly in those specificity--acknowledging the disability background does change a person, while also acknowledging that everyone is so different. It's not about "isms" but about whether or not the character actually comes alive, which is basically to write it well. 

#### The Question of Courage to Leap

At the start of the project I am more interested in the environment or the world setting, an objective setting of the world, but since all the world are reflection of people's personal world view, I started to realize that all the world and character building is about how an individual perceives the world. Therefore, the exploration of ablism and disability inclusivity in this project is not only about physical environment, but about how, at an individual level, one can really accept inclusivity, even when it's at stake with direct and short term personal interest. 

Ablism is quite invisible in daily life, and that's why it's so hard to challenge its existence; it embodies into different forms: realism, comparatives, mullenism, and so on. 
Being disabled doesn't mean they are naturally not ableism, especially under a circumstance in China where ableism is perpetuated in systematically. As Mr. Kong Kong said in our conversation, the issue is not whether someone would prefer to be fixed or not fixed, It's about whether the social norm offer the room to say no to that choice. 

What matters is how the collective social norm is. If the social norm itself allows different choice of being, then choosing to fix or not fix oneself is just a pure preference issue. 

Either transhumanism or Anti-cure, there is a bit of idealism on both sides, and I can empathize with both. Even when I know in my heart the idea of being more "progressive", it is hard not to expect and dream some kind of "glorious evolution" as an individual--after all, isn't it cool to experience more? It's true that being content with what we have is a good attitude, but do we really have to right to tell someone that you should just know your place and be content? If imagining me as the decision maker, if I decide to be a cyborg, am I influencing the world by adding a brick to the transhumanism? Am I really making a difference when I actively say no to the technological cure? How am I, as an individual, actually contributing to the path to the future by making my decisions?

>[!info]
>This part I still don't know yet, as the project is not finished


## Conclusion

>[!info] 
>kind of don't know how to write a conclusion...a conclusion for the paper?

## Bibliography

Ghose, Lynken. “‘Karma’ and the Possibility of Purification: An Ethical and Psychological Analysis of the Doctrine of ‘Karma’ in Buddhism.” _The Journal of Religious Ethics_ 35, no. 2 (2007): 259–89. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40014869. ^d47931

YANG Zeng. 2015. *Institutions and Life for People with Disability: From "Individual Model" to "Universal Model". Chinese Journal of Sociology*(in Chinese Version), 35(6): 85-115.

Oliver Michael. 1983. _Social Work with Disabled People_. London: Macmillan.

Oliver Michael. 1990. _The Politics of Disablement_. London: Macmillan.

Finkelstein, Vic. 1993. "The Commonality of Disability. " in John Swain, Sally French Colin Barnes and Carol Thomas (eds. ). _Disabling Barriers-Enabling Environments_. London: SAGE Publications.

WHO. 1980. _The International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps_. Geneva: World Health Organization.

WHO, 2001, *International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF)*. [https://icd.who.int/dev11/l-icf/en](https://icd.who.int/dev11/l-icf/en).

Josefine Wälivaara. 2018. “Marginalized Bodies of Imagined Futurescapes: Ableism and Heteronormativity in Science Fiction.” _Culture Unbound_ 10 (2): 226–45. [https://doi.org/10.3384/cu.2000.1525.2018102226](https://doi.org/10.3384/cu.2000.1525.2018102226).

Oliver, Mike. 1990, “THE INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL MODELS OF DISABILITY,” paper presented at Joint Workshop of the Living Options Group and the Research Unit of the Royal College of Physicians.

Butler, Octavia E. 2016. “‘LOST RACES OF SCIENCE FICTION’ (1980).”

Bailey, Courtney W. 2019. “On the Impossible: Disability Studies, Queer Theory, and the Surviving Crip.” _Disability Studies Quarterly_ 39 (4). [https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v39i4.6580](https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v39i4.6580).

Spriggs, M. 2002. “Lesbian Couple Create a Child Who Is Deaf like Them.” _Journal of Medical Ethics_ 28 (5): 283–283. [https://doi.org/10.1136/jme.28.5.283](https://doi.org/10.1136/jme.28.5.283).