At first, she wanted to just forget about it and maybe change her major, but then she met a younger girl at summer camp who is also wheelchair-bound due to a rare disease. She has not been able to go to school since elementary school. She has been tutored at camp and she is really not very gifted but works very hard. The little girl doesn't like being in a special school, she wants to go to school and stay with her peers and go through her youthful school days with everyone. The seemingly ordinary things: taking classes, morning readings, and after-school and jesting at school were out of reach for her. Miss.Time Orange realized that it's not only her own problem. She, the little girl and many other students and teachers are all blocked by the inaccessibilities. 

She decided to sue the school and the education bureau, even all the local schools that doesn't fit the accessibility requirement. The lawsuit lasted a long time, and she undertook a lot of pressure, both from the school and from the local government. With her relentless persistence, at least the schools on her little planet were made accessible, but she still couldn't find a job, because after such a fighting process, she became a dangerous person for any school system. From the perspective of the school, she is the grumpy, picky activist that should be remained at a respectful distance.

In China, according Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Persons with Disabilities, “a person with a disability is a person who, psychologically, physiologically…has suffered a loss or abnormality… and has lost … the ability to engage in certain activities in a normal manner.” The definition is focused more on a person’s instability to fit the “normal” life (usually production life) in with the “normal” manner, without a clear definition of what normal means. 